## `~littel-ponnys`
## Worklist Enhanced Ford

`+execute` currently takes a `+build` and returns the state of the per-event
state. We can continue this pattern with small modifications: We should take a
set of builds to run which we all run

What state do we need to track all of this?

We'll need:

```
+=  ford-state
  ::  [previous data structures elided]
  $:  ::  unblocked builds
      ::
      next-builds=(set build)
      ::  blocked builds
      ::
      $=  blocked-builds
      $:  ::  client-builds
          ::
          client-builds=(jug build build)
          ::  sub-builds
          ::
          sub-builds=(jug build build)
      ==
  ==
```

Instead of taking the build list as an argument, `+start-build` should add the
build from the incoming schematic to the `+ford-state` and kick `+execute`.

For each build, we should run an arm to turn a list of `:next-builds` to a
list of `+state-diff`s. While `+make` previously directly mutated the
`+ford-state`, it now produces a single `+state-diff`. Separating the state
mutation from `+make` allows us to potentially parallelize this once we have a
drop in `+pturn`.

```
::  changes to ford state made by a build
::
+=  state-diff
  $:  ::  build: the build we worked on
      ::
      =build
      ::  result: the outcome of this build
      ::
      $=  result
      $%  ::  %done: the build produced a result
          ::
          $:  %done
              =build-result
          ==
          ::  %blocks: the build blocked on the following builds/dependency
          ::
          $:  %blocks
              ::  builds: builds that :build blocked on
              ::
              builds=(set build)
              ::  scry-blocked: dependency that :build blocked on
              ::
              scry-blocked=(unit dependency)
          ==
      ==
      ::  sub-builds: subbuilds of :build
      ::
      ::    While running +make on :build, we need to keep track of any
      ::    sub-builds that we try to access so we can keep track of
      ::    component linkages and cache access times.
      ::
      sub-builds=(set build)
  ==
```

`+execute` takes in a `(set build)`, which represents one or more builds that
need to be started from a call/take. This is a set since a take from Clay may
report multiple changed files which will trigger multiple builds.

The first step in `+execute`, called `+gather`, which performs
non-parallelizable calculations about what we should do on each potential build
that we were passed.

The `+gather` phase:

- If we know we can promote a build, promote it instead of putting it in the
  list of builds to `+make`. If we know that we can't promote it, put it in the
  list to `+make`. As we check for promotion, we may discover additional
  sub-builds that need to be rebuilt, which we also put in the list of builds to
  make.

- Once we promote a build, we move any live listeners from the previous build
  to this build. We then send `%made` moves on those listeners. After that, we
  check recursively for future rebuilds. If the rebuild is completed and we
  have the result cached, promote listeners and send `%made`s, and then recurse
  to the next rebuild. If the rebuild is completed, but its result has been
  wiped from the cache, then add that rebuild to the list of builds to run. If
  the rebuild has not been completed, don't send `%made`s and don't recurse.

- We need to run `+cleanup` on this build and the previous build.

- Produces the set of builds that we need to run in the `+batch` phase. This
  unifies the builds we've gathered so far with the `:next-builds.state`.

Then comes the `+batch` phase, which is `(turn gathered-builds make)`. This
part is a normal turn for now, and when we have a functional `+pturn`, we can
just drop in replace that. Right now, the implementation of `+make` modifies
ford state directly, but must be changed to properly produce a `+state-diff`.

Finally, we have a `+reduce` step where we take the set of state diffs from the
`+batch` phase and apply them to the ford state.

For each `+state-diff`:

- In the case of a completed build (`%done`), we need to find all builds that
  depend on the current build, remove this builds as a blocker, and then if
  there are no more blocking builds or dependencies, move it to the
  `:next-builds.state` so in the next iteration, we'll run it.
  
- In the case of a build blocked on other builds (`%blocks`), we'll need to
  update build mappings and potentially add the sub-builds to
  `:next-builds.state`.

- In the case of a build blocked on a dependency (`:scry-blocked`), we need to
  send a move to request the blocked resource.

- We need to update `:latest-by-disc.state` if this build completed and it's a
  `%scry`. We also need to mark `:disc.dependency.schematic.build` as dirty.
  
- We need to send mades and promote listeners.

- We need to run `+cleanup` on this build and the previous build.

`+finalize` continues to be responsible for taking this set of dirty discs and
emitting moves. It is only called once, at the end of the event.

At the end of `+execute`, we should have a modified `:next-builds` in our
`+ford-state`.  In version one, for ease of implementation, testing, and
integration with how things currently are, we may tail recurse into `+execute`
with `:next-builds`. This leaves us the option to not tail recurse in the
future, and call back into ourselves on a Behn timer, which means we no longer
block the main loop.

## Odds and Ends

We'll have to modify `+cleanup` to remove the build from `:next-builds` if we
delete it.
