---
type: post
date: ~2017.10.21..20.37.30..da57
title: UP 2: Integrating Urbit Proposals with GitHub
author: ~mastyr-bottec
navsort: bump
navuptwo: true
comments: reverse
---

# Metadata
```
Title: Integrating Urbit Proposals with GitHub  
Author: ~mastyr-bottec Matthew Levan <matt.s.levan@gmail.com>
Created: ~2017.10.21  
Requires: 0
```

# Overview
Urbit Proposals (specified in [UP 0](https://urbit.org/fora/posts/~2017.10.19..03.45.26..dbec~/)) 
bring much needed structure to the major public software development processes of Urbit. However, 
they lack integration with GitHub, where the Urbit source code lives and a majority portion of 
technical discussion happens. There are two main issues with Urbit Proposals as they stand: 

1. Keeping UPs isolated to fora makes them feel like second class-citizens at worst, and 
  supplemental discussion at best.
2. UPs lack management space for tracking progress, dividing work, and defining tasks

To solve these issues, we should use GitHub's 
[project boards](https://help.github.com/articles/about-project-boards/) 
(basically kanban boards, available in the "Projects" tab of any GitHub repository) as a 
place to:
- Write notes
- Assign tasks (as GitHub issues, which are formally linked with a project)
- Formalize ownership, responsibility, and accountability in UPs
- Associate GitHub issues, notes, and pull requests with an UP
- Discuss lower-level points of an UP (fora should be reserved for the opposite)
- Manage UP progress until completion
- Monitor UPs

# Specification
## Workflow: Proposal to Project
Urbit Proposals should act as leap boards from which real work on Urbit can be done, which is 
why Urbit Proposals should, upon acceptance, transform into GitHub projects: A metamorphosis, if 
you will. Here's how the metamorphosis should flow, as implemented by any set of Tlon employees 
with the authority to do so, assuming the UP itself is technical enough to warrant becoming a 
GitHub project (this UP, for instance, does not):

1. Accept an Urbit Proposal
2. Create a new GitHub project board in the appropriate Urbit repository
3. Create new issues, if required, for the project (these should be listed in the root UP; 
   (some/all issues or PRs may already exist) 
   a. Assign issues to contributor(s) (let their interest be known via GitHub, fora, etc.)
   b. Assign issues to the project and add them as cards
4. Move cards across columns as project progress is made ("To-do" > "Doing" > "Done")
5. Close the project on consensus or other

## Potential UP 0 Alterations
In order for the metamorphosis from UP to GitHub project to happen smoothly, Urbit Proposals 
should encourage work breakdown structures in the Integration Plan section which can be easily be 
converted to issues on GitHub. The addition to UP 0's Integration Plan section might 
look like this:

> If possible, a work breakdown structure (list of tasks) is highly encouraged. For each task, 
> simply include all of the information you'd usually use for creating an issue: title, 
> description, and assignee are usually sufficient.

## A Note on Permissions
Of course, anyone may post an UP to fora. Until the galactic senate has come to order, it must 
be the responsibility of Tlon to review and accept Urbit Proposals. Accordingly, it will be the 
repsonsibility of Tlon to transform UPs into GitHub projects and maintain them as specified 
above.

# Rationale
We all have a way of keeping track of our own projects, of course. Whether it's sticky notes on 
your laptop, lists in a text file hidden in some obscure folder in your DigitalOcean Droplet, a 
Trello board, or (hopefully not) just ideas and memories in your head, development processes play 
a defining role in determining a project's pace and overall productivity. 

## An UP from... The Future(TM)
As mentioned in the Overview, UPs are a fantastic contribution to Urbit's processes and I am 
very happy they have been integrated. UP 0 reads...
> There are a number of features that could be built to support them, but we’ll leave that for 
> future UPs.

Consider this, then... an UP *from the future*! All joking aside, here are the two main problems 
I have identified with UPs as they currently stand, in more detail:

## 1. Fora's Proximity to GitHub
**Keeping UPs isolated to fora makes them feel like second-class citizens at worst, and 
   supplemental discussion at best.**

   We're probably all thinking it, but I'll go ahead and say it: fora is **slow**. Fora is sometimes 
   so slow that it doesn't even load. In this case, fora is not even slow, fora *doesn't even work*. 
   This is something everyone's aware of and [UP 1 - Ford Caching 
   Redux](https://urbit.org/fora/posts/~2017.10.19..04.47.50..c107~/) addresses this issue very well 
   and publicizes how it should (and is currently) be fixed. Perfect! 
   
   But even after UP 1 is implemented and fora is a veritable speed *demon*, UPs will still feel 
   like second-class citizens. Why? Because Urbit is still a GitHub project. Serious issues are 
   created, tracked, and closed there. PRs are merged there. A huge chunk of serious discussion 
   happens there. Only after we've moved 
   from GitHub to our own SLC Urbit version control software for main project development will UPs 
   feel completely at home on the fora. We will expect to see fora integrated with Urbit's homegrown 
   competitor to GitHub, too. It will be *better*, *faster*, *stronger*, and, yes, 
   *we have the technology*. In fact, `~poldec-tonteg`'s 
   [taskk app](https://github.com/vvisigoth/taskk) is a huge step in realizing 
   this. But there's still a bit of a chasm between here and there and we best 
   leave this to a future UP (or five)!  
   
   For now, we must 
   not focus on what could be, but rather what *is*. GitHub *is* the repository for Urbit canon. 
   Though not ideal, GitHub is a great tool. Let's use it to its full potential so we can hop off 
   it even faster. Fora is awesome, but its proximity to where the real action happens is too great 
   for UPs to be shackled to it.
   
   This brings us to problem number two...

## 2. UPs Are *Just* Proposals
**UPs lack management space for tracking progress, dividing work, and defining tasks.**

   This is not so much a "problem" as it is a correctly defined scope. UP 0 is close to perfect: 
   the format is well-defined. The only thing it lacks is how it transforms into a project. In 
   fact, authors of UP 0 are well aware that a successful UP should "naturally advance from an 
   open-ended proposal to a concrete set of tasks." This UP proposes how that happens, *naturally*.
   I hope this 

# Integration Plan
UP 2 is ready for integration; it requires no new software to be written, just a continuous 
effort by Tlon in creating and maintaining GitHub project boards for accepted UPs. The list of 
concrete steps to perform for each accepted UP are enumerated in the Specification section of this 
UP. 