---
type: post
date: ~2017.12.19..13.51.44..66c4
title: UP 3: Modular Front End Facilities For Eyre
author: ~ponmep-litsem
navsort: bump
navuptwo: true
comments: reverse
---

## Metadata
```
  Title: Modular Front End Facilities For Eyre
  Authors: ~ponmep-litsem <mikolajp@protonmail.com>
  Created: ~2017.12.19
```

## Overview

Basic front-end facilities of Urbit such as:
- Welcome page.
- Login and related facilites.
- Redirections etc.
- Client-side session management.
are currently hardcoded in Eyre.
We would like to propose decoupling of front-end and client side session management from Eyre,
in order to make the development of Urbit interface possible without hacking 
the code of Eyre vane itself. 

## Specification

Currently, Eyre hides frond-end specific code inside its many arms. 
For example '++ login-page' contains both the html layout and the scripts 
for user authentication. One way to make Eyre indepedent of any particular 
front end implementation is to move the relevant pages to separate files under 
the "portal" (working name for Urbit front-end facilities)
 clay node. Thus the the login page would be under 
```/web/portal/login```
Similarly, logout screen would be located under:
```/web/portal/logout```
The welcome screen would just be
```/web/portal```

And so on.

In this way, an alternative portal implementation could be easily implemented 
by either augmenting the files in `/web/portal` in the case of static page implementation.
This has additional advantange of making it possible to have a Portal SAP, 
which would just reside under `/web/portal.js`.

The authentication related JS code should be moved into Urb.js, which already
contains much of Client-side authentication. In this way, the Eyre only becomes responsible
for handling the authentication API, setting cookies. 

## Rationale

Currently Urbit's front-end implementation is scattered throughout different places. 
The session management front-end and code is located in the bowels of Eyre and also in urb.js
Error page, and default welcome screen are on the other hand served from /web. 
In order to facilitate greater UI modularity, it would make sense to decouple 
Eyre from any presentation-related code, and have it only handle the default entry point.
This results in greater flexibility, as UI is now located in one specific place and 
amenable to modifications/alternative implementations. 


## Integration Plan

Once the correct solution to the problem emerges, the integration would proceed as follows:

1. Moving all front-end related code into specified directory in web, into separate files. 
2. Moving authentication related code urb.js. 
   Authentication with eyre should be handled exclusively via API endpoints.
3. Verification of new architecture by building a demo portal SAP 
   with the same functionalites as the current static page implementation. 

