## `~mastyr-bottec`
Finally read through this, great work `~rovnys`. Really helped me understand Ford better. What's the status of the implementation (it's in the master branch right?)?   

A couple questions regarding cache promotion steps: 

> 3. Ford looks up the dependencies of the changed file in its state and rebuilds them. 

Why do we want Ford rebuilding the changed file's *dependencies*? Shouldn't only the *changed file* be rebuilt (and not the files/builds it depends on)? Rebuilding the file could catalyze further rebuilding *downstream* (if any downstream files/builds depend on the file which was just rebuilt), but not upstream. It seems like Ford shouldn't ever need to traverse upwards to rebuild, but maybe I'm confused! 

> 4. Ford recurses to rebuild the dependencies immediately downstream of the last build, and checks whether all of that build's dependencies are the same as at the previous revision. If they are, it promotes the cached build from the previous revision to the new revision instead of re-running the build.

I'm also not understanding this: if the Clay file has changed (and we assume it has), doesn't that ensure all files/builds which depend on it must be rebuilt, by definition? In other words, cache promotion is only potentially available for files/builds *upstream* of the new revision of the Clay file.

---

I think my confusion might just be the result of foggy vocabulary, here. When we talk about a file's *dependencies*, 
doesn't that refer strictly to files/builds *upstream* of said file? A file can't have *downstream* dependencies, right? 
Only downstream files/builds that are dependent on said file. I think it's confusing to refer to upstream and
downstream dependencies!  
  
Thoughts?