## `~rovnys-ricfer`
## A Modest Proposal: Deleting Orphaned Provisional Sub-Builds

We've now pinpointed the issue with the dependency tracking in the `%alts` schematic handler, and we have a plan to fix it.

### Problem Statement

To state the problem generally: we're not cleaning up orphaned provisional sub-builds. A sub-build is a build whose result is used by another ("client") build. A provisional sub-build is a build whose previous incarnation (the same schematic, but an earlier date) was a sub-build of the previous incarnation of a client build. It's provisional because until we run or promote the new client build, we don't know what its sub-builds are. When a provisional sub-build turns out not to be a real sub-build after all, it becomes orphaned: it has no clients. When this occurs, Ford should (usually) delete the orphaned build. Because current Ford-turbo does not delete orphaned builds, it develops space leaks and fails to cancel Clay subscriptions.

For a little more background, we create provisional sub-builds in the `+gather` arm, which determines which builds to promote and which builds need to be run. In order to find out if a build can be promoted from a previous incarnation, we first check if it depends on the namespace. If that part of the namespace has changed since the previous incarnation (which is information that stays up-to-date using subscriptions to Clay, etc. and is checked in the `+dependencies-changed` arm) we need to rebuild.

If no namespace dependency has changed, we check the sub-builds of the old build. If all the old build's sub-builds have been rebuilt at the new time and have the same results, then we promote the client build. If any of the new sub-builds have a different result from the old one, we cannot promote the old client and we need to run the new client. Finally, it's possible that some of the old sub-builds haven't been run at the new date. If this is the case, we need to run the new sub-builds first before we can know whether we can promote the client build.

If we end up unable to promote a build because some of its sub-builds have different results from their previous incarnations, then we need to consider all of the new sub-builds (not just the ones with different results) to be provisional. This is because when we run the new client build, it could gather a different set of sub-builds from the previous one.

### Solution

Ford needs to consider a new criterion when deciding whether to delete a build during `+cleanup`, and it also needs to remove certain listeners from orphaned builds beforehand. In `+cleanup`, Ford should check whether the build is a provisional sub-build of another build, and if so, it should not delete the build. This way, a build whose result is likely to be used by a client build remains cached until proven useless.

In order to inform the decision made in `+cleanup`, Ford needs do do some extra work each time it completes a build. As `+make` performs a build, it registers sub-builds using its `+depend-on` arm. `+make` runs potentially many times per build, gathering more sub-builds each time, until it completes. Once `+make` completes, we know those gathered sub-builds represent the full set of sub-builds for that build. We can compare this canonical, empirically determined set of sub-builds to the provisional sub-builds that we had collected in `+gather`. Ford now needs to note that all these provisional sub-builds are no longer provisional, since we know the real answer now.

Any provisional sub-builds not in the set of real sub-builds is an orphan, and should have a deletion pass run on it. This deletion pass consists of two parts: first, we remove some listeners from the build, then we run `+cleanup` on it. We want to remove the listeners that are only attached to this build because they had been copied from the client build, since it's possible that this build is a provisional sub-build of one client and also a real sub-build of another client. To find these provisional listeners to delete, we gather the set of listeners on the provisional client, and compare that to the set of listeners unified from the set of real clients. Any listeners on the provisional client that are not also real listeners should be deleted from the build.

Once provisional listeners have been deleted, when we run cleanup on the orphaned sub-build, if it doesn't have any other (foster parent?) builds that depend on it, it will be deleted.

We'll need to add a new field to the `+ford-state` datatype to store provisional linkages between client builds and sub-builds. This will be a pair of jugs, mirroring the structure of `components.ford-state`.