## `~littel-ponnys`
The new state machine work has been merged into the main
[ford-turbo](https://github.com/urbit/arvo/tree/ford-turbo) branch. We can once
again boot an Urbit successfully, run the dojo, and run ford's own test suite
using our ford-turbo vane.

We're now going back to looking at caching. Since clay routinely asks Ford to
perform builds with 1500 sub-builds, we're thinking about scan resistance in
our build cache, because otherwise the cache will get blown away every time
something happens to the filesystem. One interesting trick we could do is to
insert new builds into the middle of the cache instead of the front. Instead of
using `now` as the `:last-accessed` date, use an artificial date. The cache is
a treap sorted by `:last-accessed`, so statistically, the root node should be
the median `:last-accessed` of all the builds in the cache. If we want it
slightly further back in time, we could average the root node and the immediate
left one.

Doing this means that a build which has been accessed once in the cache has
some amount of resilience and won't be immediately evicted by one complex build.

We've also rethought our overall caching scheme to work on individual builds
irrespective of whether they are root builds. This should both be simpler to
implement and have a better hit ratio.

(We discovered a minor issue related to Eyre integration where Ford needs to be
able to properly handle a block on a scry that is not reading from Clay. If
that happens, Ford has no way to retrieve the data through an asynchronous move
so it should return an `%incomplete` move to the requesting duct.)