## `~mastyr-bottec`
> In my mind an UP can evolve continuosly.

Yep, that's right, I think. This being Urbit, I immediately begin to think of Kelvin versioning, but it's not appropriate here for a number of reasons, the most significant being that UPs are just proposals and if you limit how many times you can iterate a proposal, well, that wouldn't be productive, would it? 

Anyways, PEPs are version-controlled and may therefore evolve over time as well. Of course, at the moment, non-administrators are not capable of editing fora posts, so UPs are a bit restricted in that sense at the moment... That will be fixed soon, though, right? 

`~rovnys` makes a good point, though. Separation of concerns between UPs and their corresponding projects (task management boards) is crucial: again, **UPs Are *Just* Proposals**. They may provide an initial task list draft for the ease of creating the initial project board, of course, but an UP should only later be updated to reflect *high-level* changes in a project's course. *A ship's captain only steers the wheel; the crew does the tacking.* I agree with this:

> We should be able to modify a[n] UP, but only to change the plan, not its state of development.

In the future, UP 2 may simply become: "Integrating Urbit Proposals", lopping off "with GitHub". 

A couple more thoughts here:

## 1. UPs need more metadata
If UPs may evolve continuously and UP 2 is accepted, the UP format will require additional metadata fields. Check out PEP 1's metadata, for example:
```
PEP:	1
Title:	PEP Purpose and Guidelines
Author:	Barry Warsaw, Jeremy Hylton, David Goodger, Nick Coghlan
Status:	Active
Type:	Process
Created:	13-Jun-2000
Post-History:	21-Mar-2001, 29-Jul-2002, 03-May-2003, 05-May-2012, 07-Apr-2013
```
UPs require "Status" and "Type" as well, as we already see at least two UP types emerging (technical and process). We should probably have something similar to "Post-History" as well (`%clay` is keeping track already, after all). "History" would be fine. 

For UPs which are in active technical development (like UP 1 is, for example), perhaps an additional field could read: 
```
Project: https://github.com/urbit/arvo/projects/1
```
Having a "Project" field allows readers to easily jump into the implementation status and task management view of any UP, whether it be on GitHub or other platform. Project 1 *must* belong to UP 1.

That's **four additional fields**, for now:
1. Status
2. Type
3. Project (a reference to the "task tracker"; could be "N/A" for some UP types)
4. History

## 2. An UP for each %vane?
Today on `urbit-meta`, `~siddev` and `~master-morzod` made some good points: 
```
       ~siddev+ we need a status board with each vane in it and known
       ~siddev+ non-starters maybe... it's hard to find meaningful projects with
-------[42.910]
       ~siddev+ out a correct understanding of the state of the system
~master-morzod+ yeah, it's almost impossible to meaningfully contribute now
~master-morzod+ especially with the churn on github
```
UP 2's integration, I think (no bias here ;), is the perfect candidate for alleviating this issue. Would it be helpful for each `%vane` to have its own UP and corresponding project on GitHub? One of the widely touted benefits of Urbit in general, and certainly `arvo` is that it's simple. We can all hear "it's only 30,000 lines of code!" ringing eternally in our minds, can't we? If each `%vane` truly is as simple as is claimed (I'm not sure, I'm no Urbit expert, but I hope that's right), won't each one only need one UP? If not, we might need to develop some sort of UP *nesting*, otherwise topically related UPs (such as different feature proposals for the same `%vane`) may be dispersed sporadically along UP's linear number system. 

*If* an UP per `%vane` *is* appropriate, then that in and of itself is a strong argument for continuously evolving UPs.

> "But what about the `%vane` commentaries in the docs and UPs' relationship with docs in general?" 

Those should specify the *current* state of the `%vane` or other system; an UP should specify where it's *going*.


## Takeaways

1. Urbit Proposals and their corresponding projects must address separate domains
2. Urbit Proposals may be updated, but only to change the plan
3. Urbit Proposals need more metadata with integration of UP 2

And, of course, a question: Should `%vane`s get their own UPs?
